okay
so today I want to show you how to use
masonite hardboard panel to create a
surface to paint on also you might hear
it referred to as a painting support so
this is a regular 1/8 inch
hardboard or masonite that you can get
at Home Depot or or Lowe's or any lumber
store it also comes in a quarter inch
size but I prefer the 1/8 inch it's a
little bit thinner it's a little bit
lighter and it creates a very good
surface that fits well into an easel
into the grooves or it's it's easy to
stack easy to store so this comes in
typically a 4 foot by 8 foot sheet
there's a diagram that I can send to you
that actually I can cut several pieces
I've been able to get about 21 different
painting services everything from a 24
by 48 down to a 4 by 6 like I have here
in my hand so what I'm going to do today
I want to show you how to use gesso and
for this you can you can purchase any
quality gesso at like Michael's or or
online like at black or Utrecht and this
happens to be a gesso made by liquitex
so it's just your basic acrylic gesso
and what you want to do is you don't
have to thin it at all this will give a
very opaque finish with a matte this is
indicated on the back that it's matte
and it's somewhere between fluid and
thick now if you have to you can thin
this water but I never thin it I just
use it straight out of the bottle so I
give it a little bit of
so that the the gesso goes down into the
bottom and will run at the top so I can
squeeze it out because it's very very
thick so I'll squeeze a little bit onto
the surface here that's probably about
all I'll need just to cover that and now
what I usually do before I start and
just to kind of give you an idea some of
the tools that you need to have to in
order to do this I like to wear gloves
gloves not only protect my hands but
it's easy to clean up all I have to do
is pull off the glove gesso is very very
thick it dries very quickly and it'll
pretty much stick to any surface that
you put it on real hard to take off once
it's dry so get my gloves on here also
want to show you that I use just a
couple of different palette knives this
is for a little bit larger surface to
help thin it out this is just a flat
palette knife it
I use it because it's kind of like a
butter knife it helps me spread spread
the gesso on there very quickly and and
cleanly and without a lot a lot of mess
now I've got some bumps and some little
lumps in here so I'll just remove it by
not sure where those little lumps are
coming from but I'll just put that on
the surface like that let's get rid of
these little lumps real easy to do with
the with a flat knife like this might
take a little practice a little light
touch when you do it the first time but
basically I'm not trying to get any kind
of a you know exactly perfectly flat
surface all I want to do is cover it at
this point
now Jess's can be sanded
so if you want you can once you've
covered it and you let it dry you can
sand it real real smooth if you like or
what I like to do I just kind of leave
it like that
make sure that it covers everything make
sure there's no lines in it like that
just cover it real nice and get it all
the way to the edges
I want to later on I can send off these
ridges but you know a lot of times I
just like to leave it like that because
it kind of makes an interesting painting
underneath keep in mind that you you
know in addition to any brushstrokes
you're going to you will you know most
likely kind of see that pattern under
your paint unless you paint really
really thick like I do but because I do
like to use a lot of paint in my on my
surface I tend to just once I've got it
covered I just leave it alone so there's
my surface right there there's a back to
this also it's a little bit rougher and
what I like to do is make sure that the
back is covered as well that way no
moisture and this is one thing that the
gesso does in addition to providing a
good painting surface it gives you it
actually seals the surface so that no
moisture can get in there and warmth
your you know warp your your masterpiece
get rid of a little bit of that put a
little too much on there but I want to
make sure the back is covered also
always make sure you have some something
on the floor because I just had a little
piece fly off of there like I said it's
very very it'll stick to just about
anything it'd be real hard to get out of
a carpet unless you attack it right away
with with some water nice thing about it
is though it does clean up with water so
as long as it's still wet you know
you're it's not really difficult to get
off of your clothes or you know off of
your carpet if you spill it there you do
have to get it really quick though it's
really easy to clean up your tools clean
up very quickly so there I've covered
one surface on the front one surface on
the back the back doesn't really matter
too much how you get it as long as you
cover it all that way you've sealed it
and then no moisture can get in there so
there's my little lesson on covering
cardboard with gesso